people named adam smith adam smith disambiguation


adam smith
frsa





born
june 1723
june 1723
kirkcaldy fife scotland


died
july 179017900717 aged
edinburgh scotland


nationality
scottish


alma mater
university glasgow
balliol college oxford


notable work
wealth nations
theory moral sentiments





region
western philosophy


school
classical economics



main interests

political philosophy ethics economics



notable ideas

classical economics
modern free market
division labour
invisible hand




influences


aristotle hume hutcheson mandeville quesnay rousseau locke burke voltaire








influenced


bastiat friedman hayek mises rothbard rand krugman sowell hegel hodgskin keynes malthus marx mill ricardo saintsimon founding fathers chomsky george comte nash









signature







part series


capitalism







concepts


business
business cycle
businessperson
capital
capital accumulation
capital markets
capitalist mode production
company
corporation
competitive markets
economic interventionism
economic surplus
entrepreneurship
fictitious capital
financial market
free price system
free market
goods services
investor
invisible hand
liberalization
marginalism
money
private property
privatization
profit
supply demand
surplus value
value
wage labour
wage slavery








economic systems


anglosaxon
free market
laissezfaire
mercantile
mixed
nordic
regulated market
regulatory
rhine
social market
state
welfare
east asian








economic theories


american
austrian
chicago
classical
institutional
keynesian
marxian
modern monetary
monetarist
neoclassical
institutional
keynesian
supplyside








origins


enlightenment
capitalism islam
commercial revolution
feudalism
industrial revolution
mercantilism
primitive accumulation
physiocracy
simple commodity production








development


advanced
consumer
corporate
crony
finance
global
late
marxist
merchant
rentier
state monopoly
techno








people


adam smith
john stuart mill
david ricardo
thomas malthus
jeanbaptiste
milton friedman
friedrich hayek
john maynard keynes
alfred marshall
ludwig mises
rand
murray rothbard
joseph schumpeter
thorstein veblen
weber
ronald coase








related topics


anticapitalism
black capitalism
capitalist state
consumerism
corporatism
crisis theory
criticism capitalism
cronyism
culture capitalism
exploitation
globalization
history
history theory
market economy
periodizations capitalism
perspectives capitalism
postcapitalism
speculation
spontaneous order
venture philanthropy








ideologies


anarchocapitalism
democratic capitalism
dirigisme
ecocapitalism
humanistic capitalism
inclusive capitalism
liberalism economic
libertarianism
neocapitalism
neoliberalism
objectivism
ordoliberalism
social democracy








capitalism portal
economics portal
philosophy portal
politics portal

















part series


liberalism







schools



history liberalism
contributions liberal theory









ideas



civil political rights
cultural liberalism
democracy

liberal democracy


economic liberalism
egalitarianism
free market
free trade
freedom press
freedom religion
freedom speech
gender equality
harm principle
internationalism
laissezfaire
liberty
market economy
natural legal rights
negative positive liberty
open society
permissive society
private property
rule
secularism
separation church state
social contract
welfare state









variants



anarchocapitalism
civic nationalism
classical liberalism
conservative liberalism
democratic liberalism
geolibertarianism
green liberalism
liberal feminism

equity feminism


liberal internationalism
liberal socialism
libertarianism
muscular liberalism
neoliberalism
ordoliberalism
radical centrism
radicalism
religious liberalism

christian
islamic


secular liberalism
social liberalism
technoliberalism









people



rifaa altahtawi
juan bautista alberdi
anping
matthew arnold
raymond aron
frédéric bastiat
simone beauvoir
jeremy bentham
isaiah berlin
eduard bernstein
william beveridge
norberto bobbio
ludwig joseph brentano
john bright
edmund burke
thomas carlyle
anders chydenius
richard cobden
marquis condorcet
benjamin constant
benedetto croce
jean rond dalembert
ralf dahrendorf
john dewey
charles dickens
denis diderot
zhang dongsun
ronald dworkin
ahmed lutfi elsayed
ralph waldo emerson
karlhermann flach
milton friedman
john kenneth galbraith
william lloyd garrison
josé ortega gasset
david lloyd george
william gladstone
friedrich hayek
auberon herbert
thomas hobbes
leonard trelawny hobhouse
john hobson

wilhelm humboldt
piero gobetti
francisco luís gomes
john gray
thomas hill green
thomas jefferson
jubani
immanuel kant
namık kemal
john maynard keynes
kymlicka
john locke
salvador madariaga
james madison
harriet martineau
minoo masani
james mill
john stuart mill
john milton
ludwig mises
donald barkly molteno
chiozza money
charles montesquieu
josé maría luis mora
chantal mouffe
dadabhai naoroji
friedrich naumann
robert nozick
bertil ohlin
thomas paine
alan paton
karl raimund popper
richard price
joseph priestley
guillermo prieto
françois quesnay
ignacio ramírez
rand
walther rathenau
john rawls
joseph
david ricardo
wilhelm röpke
richard rorty
carlo rosselli
murray rothbard
jeanjacques rousseau
jeanbaptiste
amartya
shenzhi
shih
algernon sidney
emmanuel sieyès
i̇brahim şinasi
adam smith
hernando soto
herbert spencer
baruch spinoza
anne louise germaine staël
william graham sumner
tawney
johan rudolf thorbecke
henry david thoreau
alexis tocqueville
antoine destutt tracy
anne robert jacques turgot
voltaire
lester frank ward
weber
mary wollstonecraft
xingzhi
zhun









organizations



liberal parties
africa liberal network

alliance liberals
democrats europe alde


alliance liberals democrats
europe party aldep


arab liberal federation


council asian liberals
democrats cald

european democratic party
european liberal youth lymec
european party individual liberty epil

international alliance
libertarian parties ialp


international federation
liberal youth iflry

liberal international

liberal network
latin america relial


liberal south east
european network libseen










regional variants



europe
latin america
albania
armenia
australia
austria
belgium
bolivia
brazil
bulgaria
canada
china
chile
colombia
croatia
cuba
cyprus
czech lands
denmark
ecuador
egypt
estonia
finland
france
germany
greece
honduras
hong kong
hungary
iceland
india
iran
israel
italy
japan
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
macedonia
mexico
moldova
montenegro
netherlands
zealand
nicaragua
nigeria
norway
panama
paraguay
peru
philippines
poland
portugal
romania
russia
senegal
serbia
slovakia
slovenia
spain
south africa
south korea
sweden
switzerland
taiwan
thailand
tunisia
turkey
ukraine
united kingdom
united states
uruguay
venezuela
zimbabwe









related topics



democratic capitalism
democratic education
liberal bias academia
liberal conservatism
liberal socialism
national liberalism
regressive left









liberalism portal
politics portal















adam smith frsa june 1723 june 1723 july 1790 scottish economist philosopher author well moral philosopher pioneer political economy figure scottish enlightenment era1 smith best known classic works theory moral sentiments 1759 inquiry nature causes wealth nations 1776 latter usually abbreviated wealth nations considered magnum opus first modern work economics2
smith studied social philosophy university glasgow balliol college oxford first students benefit scholarships fellow scot john snell graduating delivered successful series public lectures edinburgh leading collaborate david hume scottish enlightenment smith obtained professorship glasgow teaching moral philosophy time wrote published theory moral sentiments later life took tutoring position allowed travel throughout europe intellectual leaders
smith laid foundations classical free market economic theory wealth nations precursor modern academic discipline economics works developed concept division labour expounded upon rational selfinterest competition lead economic prosperity smith controversial general approach writing style often satirised tory writers moralising tradition william hogarth jonathan swift 2005 wealth nations named among best scottish books time3 minor planet 12838 adamsmith named memory4



contents


biography

early life
formal education
teaching career
tutoring travels
later years


personality beliefs

character
religious views


published works

theory moral sentiments
wealth nations
criticism dissent
works


legacy

economics moral philosophy
british imperial debates
portraits monuments banknotes
residence
symbol free market economics


also
notes
citations
references
reading
external links



biographyedit
early lifeedit




portrait smiths mother margaret douglas


smith born kirkcaldy county fife scotland father also adam smith scottish writer signet senior solicitor advocate prosecutor judge advocate also served comptroller customs kirkcaldy5 1720 married margaret douglas daughter landed robert douglas strathendry also fife father died months born leaving mother widow6 date smiths baptism church scotland kirkcaldy june 17237 often treated also date birth5 unknown although events smiths early childhood known scottish journalist john smiths biographer recorded smith abducted gypsies three released others went rescue himn smith close mother probably encouraged pursue scholarly ambitions9 attended burgh school kirkcaldy—characterised best secondary schools scotland period8—from 1729 1737 learned latin mathematics history writing9
formal educationedit




commemorative plaque smith located smiths home town kirkcaldy


smith entered university glasgow fourteen studied moral philosophy francis hutcheson9 smith developed passion liberty reason free speech 1740 smith graduate scholar presented undertake postgraduate studies balliol college oxford snell exhibition10
smith considered teaching glasgow superior oxford found intellectually stifling11 book chapter wealth nations smith wrote university oxford greater part public professors many years given altogether even pretence teaching smith also reported complained friends oxford officials discovered reading copy david humes treatise human nature subsequently confiscated book punished severely reading it81213 according william robert scott oxford smiths time gave little help towards lifework14 nevertheless smith took opportunity oxford teach several subjects reading many books shelves large bodleian library15 smith studying time oxford happy according letters16 near time smith began suffering shaking fits probably symptoms nervous breakdown17 left oxford university 1746 scholarship ended1718
book wealth nations smith comments quality instruction meager intellectual activity english universities compared scottish counterparts attributes rich endowments colleges oxford cambridge made income professors independent ability attract students fact distinguished letters could make even comfortable living ministers church england13
smiths discontent oxford might part absence beloved teacher glasgow francis hutcheson hutcheson well regarded prominent lecturers university glasgow earned approbation students colleagues even ordinary residents fervor earnestness orations sometimes opened public lectures endeavoured merely teach philosophy make students embody philosophy lives appropriately acquiring epithet preacher philosophy unlike smith hutcheson system builder rather magnetic personality method lecturing influenced students caused greatest reverentially refer never forgotten hutcheson—a title smith correspondence used describe people good friend david hume influential mentor francis hutcheson19
teaching careeredit
smith began delivering public lectures 1748 edinburgh sponsored philosophical society edinburgh patronage lord kames20 lecture topics included rhetoric belleslettres21 later subject progress opulence latter topic first expounded economic philosophy obvious simple system natural liberty smith adept public speaking lectures success22




david hume friend contemporary smith


1750 smith philosopher david hume senior decade writings covering history politics philosophy economics religion smith hume shared closer intellectual personal bonds important figures scottish enlightenment23
1751 smith earned professorship glasgow university teaching logic courses 1752 elected member philosophical society edinburgh introduced society lord kames head moral philosophy glasgow died next year smith took position22 worked academic next thirteen years characterised useful therefore happiest honorable period life24
smith published theory moral sentiments 1759 embodying glasgow lectures work concerned human morality depends sympathy agent spectator individual members society smith defined mutual sympathy basis moral sentiments based explanation special moral sense third lord shaftesbury hutcheson done utility hume mutual sympathy term best captured modern parlance twentiethcentury concept empathy capacity recognise feelings experienced another
following publication theory moral sentiments smith became popular many wealthy students left schools countries enroll glasgow learn smith25 publication theory moral sentiments smith began give attention jurisprudence economics lectures less theories morals26 example smith lectured cause increase national wealth labour rather nations quantity gold silver basis mercantilism economic theory dominated western european economic policies time27




françois quesnay leaders physiocratic school thought


1762 university glasgow conferred smith title doctor laws 1763 obtained offer charles townshend—who introduced smith david hume—to tutor stepson henry scott young duke buccleuch smith resigned professorship take tutoring position subsequently attempted return fees collected students resigned middle term students refused28
tutoring travelsedit
smiths tutoring entailed touring europe scott time educated scott variety subjects—such proper polish28 paid £300 year plus expenses along £300 year pension roughly twice former income teacher28 smith first travelled tutor toulouse france stayed half years28 according account found toulouse somewhat boring written hume begun write book pass away time28 touring south france group moved geneva smith philosopher voltaire29
geneva party moved paris smith came know several great intellectual leaders time invariably effect future works list included benjamin franklin30 turgot jean dalembert andré morellet helvétius notably françois quesnay head physiocratic school31 smith impressed ideas32 might dedicated wealth nations quesnay died beforehand33 physiocrats opposed mercantilism dominating economic theory time illustrated motto laissez faire laissez passer monde même pass world goes also known declared agricultural activity produced real wealth merchants industrialists manufacturers not30 however represent true school thought mere smoke screen manufactured hide actual criticisms nobility church arguing made real clients merchants34
wealth france virtually destroyed louis louis ruinous wars35 aiding american insurgents british perhaps destructive terms public perceptions seen excessive consumption goods services deemed economic contribution—unproductive labour assuming nobility church essentially detractors economic growth feudal system agriculture france sector important maintain wealth nation given english economy yielded income distribution stood contrast existed france smith concluded teachings beliefs physiocrats imperfections perhaps nearest approximation truth published upon subject political economy36 distinction productive versus unproductive labour—the physiocratic classe steril—was predominant issue development understanding would become classical economic theory
later yearsedit
1766 henry scotts younger brother died paris smiths tour tutor ended shortly thereafter30 smith returned home year kirkcaldy devoted much next years magnum opus37 befriended henry moyes young blind showed precocious aptitude well teaching moyes smith secured patronage david hume thomas reid young mans education38 1773 smith elected fellow royal society london39 elected member literary club 1775 wealth nations published 1776 instant success selling first edition months40
1778 smith appointed post commissioner customs scotland went live mother panmure house edinburghs canongate41 five years later member philosophical society edinburgh received royal charter automatically became founding members royal society edinburgh42 1787 1789 occupied honorary position lord rector university glasgow43 died northern wing panmure house edinburgh july 1790 painful illness buried canongate kirkyard44 death smith expressed disappointment achieved more45
smiths literary executors friends scottish academic world physicist chemist joseph black pioneering geologist james hutton46 smith left behind many notes unpublished material gave instructions destroy anything publication47 mentioned early unpublished history astronomy probably suitable duly appeared 1795 along material essays philosophical subjects46
smiths library went david douglas lord reston cousin colonel robert douglas strathendry fife lived smith eventually divided surviving children cecilia margaret cunningham david anne bannerman death husband reverend cunningham prestonpans 1878 cunningham sold books remainder passed professor robert oliver cunningham queens college belfast presented part library queens college death remaining books sold death bannerman 1879 portion library went intact college free church edinburgh collection transferred university edinburgh main library 1972
personality beliefsedit
characteredit




james tassies enamel paste medallion smith provided model many engravings portraits remain today48


much known smiths personal views beyond deduced published articles personal papers destroyed death request47 never married49 seems maintained close relationship mother lived return france died years death50
smith described several contemporaries biographers comically absentminded peculiar habits speech gait smile inexpressible benignity51 known talk himself45 habit began childhood would smile rapt conversation invisible companions52 also occasional spells imaginary illness45 reported books papers placed tall stacks study52 according story smith took charles townshend tour tanning factory discussing free trade smith walked huge tanning needed help escape53 also said bread butter teapot drunk concoction declared worst ever according another account smith distractedly went walking nightgown ended miles outside town nearby church bells brought back reality5253
james boswell student smiths glasgow university later knew literary club says smith thought speaking ideas conversation might reduce sale books conversation unimpressive according boswell told joshua reynolds made rule company never talk understood54




portrait smith john 1790


smith alternately described someone large nose bulging eyes protruding lower nervous twitch speech impediment whose countenance manly agreeable1355 smith said acknowledged looks point saying beau nothing books13 smith rarely portraits56 almost depictions created lifetime drawn memory bestknown portraits smith profile james tassie etchings john kay57 line engravings produced covers 19th century reprints wealth nations based largely tassies medallion58
religious viewsedit
considerable scholarly debate nature smiths religious views smiths father shown strong interest christianity belonged moderate wing church scotland59 fact adam smith received snell exhibition suggests gone oxford intention pursuing career church england60
angloamerican economist ronald coase challenged view smith deist based fact smiths writings never explicitly invoke explanation harmonies natural human worlds61 according coase though smith sometimes refer great architect universe later scholars jacob viner much exaggerated extent adam smith committed belief personal god62 belief coase finds little evidence passages wealth nations smith writes curiosity mankind great phenomena nature generation life growth dissolution plants animals enquire causes superstition first attempted satisfy curiosity referring wonderful appearances immediate agency gods philosophy afterwards endeavoured account familiar causes mankind better acquainted agency gods62
authors argue smiths social economic philosophy inherently theological entire model social order logically dependent notion gods action nature63
smith also close friend later executor david hume commonly characterised time atheist64 publication 1777 smiths letter william strahan described humes courage face death spite irreligiosity attracted considerable controversy65
published worksedit
theory moral sentimentsedit
main article theory moral sentiments




1922 printing inquiry nature causes wealth nations


1759 smith published first work theory moral sentiments sold copublishers andrew millar london alexander kincaid edinburgh66 smith continued making extensive revisions book deathn although wealth nations widely regarded smiths influential work believed smith considered theory moral sentiments superior work68
work smith critically examines moral thinking time suggests conscience arises dynamic interactive social relationships people seek mutual sympathy sentiments69 goal writing work explain source mankinds ability form moral judgement given people begin life moral sentiments smith proposes theory sympathy observing others seeing judgements form others oneself makes people aware others perceive behaviour feedback receive perceiving imagining others judgements creates incentive achieve mutual sympathy sentiments leads people develop habits principles behaviour come constitute ones conscience70
scholars perceived conflict theory moral sentiments wealth nations former emphasises sympathy others latter focuses role selfinterest71 recent years however scholars727374 smiths work argued contradiction exists claim theory moral sentiments smith develops theory psychology individuals seek approval impartial spectator result natural desire outside observers sympathise sentiments rather viewing theory moral sentiments wealth nations presenting incompatible views human nature smith scholars regard works emphasising different aspects human nature vary depending situation otteson argues books newtonian methodology deploy similar market model explaining creation development largescale human social orders including morality economics well language75 ekelund hebert offer differing view observing selfinterest present works former sympathy moral faculty holds selfinterest check whereas latter competition economic faculty restrains selfinterest76
wealth nationsedit
main article wealth nations




later building site smith wrote wealth nations


disagreement classical neoclassical economists central message smiths influential work inquiry nature causes wealth nations 1776 neoclassical economists emphasise smiths invisible hand77 concept mentioned middle work book chapter classical economists believe smith stated programme promoting wealth nations first sentences attributes growth wealth prosperity division labour
smith used term invisible hand history astronomy78 referring invisible hand jupiter theory moral sentiments79 1759 wealth nations80 1776 last statement invisible hand interpreted numerous ways

every individual therefore endeavours much employ capital support domestic industry direct industry produce greatest value every individual necessarily labours render annual revenue society great generally indeed neither intends promote public interest knows much promoting preferring support domestic foreign industry intends security directing industry manner produce greatest value intends gain many cases invisible hand promote part intention always worse society part pursuing interest frequently promotes society effectually really intends promote never known much good done affected trade public good affectation indeed common among merchants words need employed dissuading

regard statement smiths central message also quote frequently smiths dictum81

benevolence butcher brewer baker expect dinner regard interest address humanity selflove never talk necessities advantages





first page wealth nations 1776 london edition


smiths statement benefits invisible hand meant answercitation needed mandevilles contention private vices turned public benefits82 shows smiths belief individual pursues selfinterest conditions justice unintentionally promotes good society selfinterested competition free market argued would tend benefit society whole keeping prices still building incentive wide variety goods services nevertheless wary businessmen warned conspiracy public contrivance raise prices83 smith warned collusive nature business interests form cabals monopolies fixing highest price squeezed buyers84 smith also warned businessdominated political system would allow conspiracy businesses industry consumers former scheming influence politics legislation smith states interest manufacturers merchants particular branch trade manufactures always respects different even opposite publicthe proposal regulation commerce comes order ought always listened great precaution ought never adopted till long carefully examined scrupulous suspicious attention85 thus smiths chief worry seems business given special protections privileges government contrast absence special political favours believed business activities generally beneficial whole society

great multiplication production different arts consequence division labour occasions wellgoverned society universal opulence extends lowest ranks people every workman great quantity work dispose beyond occasion every workman exactly situation enabled exchange great quantity goods great quantity comes thing price great quantity supplies abundantly occasion accommodate amply occasion general plenty diffuses different ranks society wealth nations ii10

neoclassical interest smiths statement invisible hand originates possibility seeing precursor neoclassical economics concept general equilibrium samuelsons economics refers times smiths invisible hand emphasise connection samuelson86 quotes smiths invisible hand statement substituting general interest public interest samuelson87 concludes smith unable prove essence invisiblehand doctrine indeed 1940s knew prove even state properly kernel truth proposition perfectly competitive market
differently classical economists smiths first sentences programme promote wealth nations using physiocratical concept economy circular process secure growth inputs period must exceed inputs period therefore outputs period used usable inputs period regarded unproductive labour contribute growth smith heard france among others quesnay french insight unproductive labour reduced labour productively smith added proposal productive labour made even productive deepening division labour smith argued deepening division labour competition leads greater productivity leads lower prices thus increasing standard living—general plenty universal opulence—for extended markets increased production lead continuous reorganisation production invention ways producing turn lead increased production lower prices improved standards living smiths central message therefore dynamic competition growth machine secures wealth nations smiths argument predicted britains evolution workshop world underselling outproducing competitors opening sentences wealth nations summarise policy

annual labour every nation fund originally supplies necessaries conveniences life annually consumes produce bears greater smaller proportion number consume proportion must every nation regulated different circumstances

first skill dexterity judgment labour generally applied
secondly proportion number employed useful labour employed emphasis added88


however smith added abundance scantiness supply seems depend upon former circumstances upon latter89
criticism dissentedit
alfred marshall criticised smiths definition economy several points argued equally important money services important goods must emphasis human welfare instead wealth invisible hand works well production consumption operates free markets small atomistic producers consumers allowing supply demand fluctuate equilibrate conditions monopoly oligopoly invisible hand fails nobel prizewinning economist joseph stiglitz says topic smiths better known ideas reason invisible hand often seems invisible often there90
worksedit




smiths burial place canongate kirkyard


shortly death smith nearly manuscripts destroyed last years seemed planning major treatises theory history sciences arts posthumously published essays philosophical subjects history astronomy smiths plus thoughts ancient physics metaphysics probably contain parts would latter treatise lectures jurisprudence notes taken smiths early lectures plus early draft wealth nations published part 1976 glasgow edition works correspondence smith works including published posthumously include lectures justice police revenue arms 1763 first published 1896 essays philosophical subjects 179591
legacyedit
economics moral philosophyedit
wealth nations precursor modern academic discipline economics works smith expounded rational selfinterest competition lead economic prosperity smith controversial general approach writing style often satirised tory writers moralising tradition hogarth swift discussion university winchester suggests92 2005 wealth nations named among best scottish books time3 former prime minister margaret thatcher said used carry copy book handbag93
light arguments forward smith economic theorists britain academic belief mercantilism began decline britain late 18th century industrial revolution britain embraced free trade smiths laissezfaire economics british empire used power spread broadly liberal economic model around world characterised open markets relatively barrier free domestic international trade94
george stigler attributes smith important substantive proposition economics competition owners resources example labour land capital profitably resulting equal rate return equilibrium uses adjusted apparent differences arising factors training trust hardship unemployment95
paul samuelson finds smiths pluralist supply demand applied wages rents profit valid valuable anticipation general equilibrium modelling walras century later smiths allowance wage increases short intermediate term capital accumulation invention contrasted malthus ricardo karl marx propounding rigid subsistence–wage theory labour supply96
joseph schumpeter criticised smith lack technical rigour argued enabled smiths writings appeal wider audiences limitation made success brilliant would taken seriously deeply unearthed recondite truth used difficult ingenious methods would understood ambitions fact disliked whatever went beyond plain common sense never moved heads even dullest readers gently encouraging trivialities homely observations making feel comfortable along97
classical economists presented competing theories smith termed labour theory value later marxian economics descending classical economics also smiths labour theories part first volume karl marxs major work capital published german 1867 marx focused labour theory value considered exploitation labour capital9899 labour theory value held value thing determined labour went production contrasts modern contention neoclassical economics value thing determined willing give obtain thing




adam smith theatre kirkcaldy


body theory later termed neoclassical economics marginalism formed 1870 1910 term economics popularised neoclassical economists alfred marshall concise synonym economic science substitute earlier broader term political economy used smith100101 corresponded influence subject mathematical methods used natural sciences102 neoclassical economics systematised supply demand joint determinants price quantity market equilibrium affecting allocation output distribution income dispensed labour theory value smith famously identified classical economics favour marginal utility theory value demand side general theory costs supply side103
bicentennial anniversary publication wealth nations celebrated 1976 resulting increased interest theory moral sentiments works throughout academia 1976 smith likely represented author wealth nations theory moral sentiments thereby founder moral philosophy science economics homo economicus economic also often represented moral person additionally economists david levy sandra peart secret history dismal science point opposition hierarchy beliefs inequality including racial inequality provide additional support point smiths opposition slavery colonialism empire show caricatures smith drawn opponents views hierarchy inequality online article emphasised also smiths statements need high wages poor efforts keep wages vanity philosopher equality hierarchy postclassical economics peart levy also cite smiths view common street porter intellectually inferior philosopher104 point need greater appreciation public views discussions science subjects considered technical also cite smiths opposition often expressed view science superior common sense105
smith also explained relationship growth private property civil government

live together society tolerable degree security though civil magistrate protect injustice passions avarice ambition rich poor hatred labour love present ease enjoyment passions prompt invade property passions much steady operation much universal influence wherever great property great inequality rich must least five hundred poor affluence supposes indigence many affluence rich excites indignation poor often driven want prompted envy invade possessions shelter civil magistrate owner valuable property acquired labour many years perhaps many successive generations sleep single night security times surrounded unknown enemies though never provoked never appease whose injustice protected powerful civil magistrate continually held chastise acquisition valuable extensive property therefore necessarily requires establishment civil government property least none exceeds value three days labour civil government necessary civil government supposes certain subordination necessity civil government gradually grows acquisition valuable property principal causes naturally introduce subordination gradually grow growth valuable property inferior wealth combine defend superior wealth possession property order superior wealth combine defend possession inferior shepherds herdsmen feel security herds flocks depends upon security great shepherd herdsman maintenance lesser authority depends upon greater authority upon subordination depends power keeping inferiors subordination constitute sort little nobility feel interested defend property support authority little sovereign order able defend property support authority civil government instituted security property reality instituted defence rich poor property none source wealth nations book chapter part

british imperial debatesedit
smiths chapter colonies turn would help shape british imperial debates midnineteenth century onward wealth nations would become ambiguous text regarding imperial question chapter colonies smith pondered solve crisis developing across atlantic among empires thirteen american colonies offered different proposals easing tensions first proposal called giving colonies independence thus parting friendly basis britain would able develop maintain freetrade relationship possibly even informal military alliance smiths second proposal called theoretical imperial federation would bring colonies metropole closer together imperial parliamentary system imperial free trade106
smiths prominent disciple nineteenthcentury britain peace advocate richard cobden preferred first proposal cobden would lead anticorn league overturning corn laws 1846 shifting britain policy free trade empire cheap decades come handsoff approach toward british empire would become known cobdenism manchester school107 turn century however advocates smiths second proposal joseph shield nicholson would become ever vocal opposing cobdenism calling instead imperial federation108 marcwilliam palen notes hand adam smith’s late nineteenth early twentiethcentury cobdenite adherents used theories argue gradual imperial devolution empire cheap’ various proponents imperial federation throughout british world sought smith’s theories overturn predominant cobdenite handsoff imperial approach instead firm grip bring empire closer ever before109 smiths ideas thus played important part subsequent debates british empire
portraits monuments banknotesedit




statue smith edinburghs high street erected private donations organised adam smith institute


smith commemorated banknotes printed different banks portrait appeared since 1981 notes issued clydesdale bank scotland110111 march 2007 smiths image also appeared series notes issued bank england making first scotsman feature english banknote112




statue smith built 1867–1870 headquarters university london burlington gardens


largescale memorial smith alexander stoddart unveiled july 2008 edinburgh feet mtall bronze sculpture stands royal mile outside giles cathedral parliament square near mercat cross113 20thcentury sculptor sanborn best known kryptos sculpture united states central intelligence agency created multiple pieces feature smiths work central connecticut state university circulating capital tall cylinder features extract wealth nations lower half upper half text represented binary code114 university north carolina charlotte outside belk college business administration adam smiths spinning top115116 another smith sculpture cleveland state university117 also appears narrator 2013 play road centred proponent laissezfaire economics late eighteenth century dealing obliquely financial crisis 2007–2008 recession followed—in premiere production portrayed bill paterson
bust smith hall heroes national wallace monument stirling
residenceedit
adam smith resided panmure house 1778 1790 residence purchased edinburgh business school heriot watt university fundraising begun restore it118119 part northern original building appears demolished 19th century make iron foundry
symbol free market economicsedit




adam smiths spinning sculpture sanborn cleveland state university


smith celebrated advocates free market policies founder free market economics view reflected naming bodies adam smith institute london adam smith society120 australian adam smith club121 terms adam smith necktie122
alan greenspan argues smith coin term laissezfaire left adam smith identify moregeneral principles brought conceptual clarity seeming chaos market transactions greenspan continues wealth nations great achievements human intellectual history123 orourke describes smith founder free market economics124
writers argued smiths support laissezfaire french means leave alone overstated herbert stein wrote people wear adam smith necktie make statement devotion idea free markets limited government misrepresents smiths ideas stein writes smith pure doctrinaire idea viewed government intervention market great skepticismyet prepared accept propose qualifications policy specific cases judged effect would beneficial would undermine basically free character system wear adam smith necktie steins reading wealth nations could justify food drug administration consumer product safety commission mandatory employer health benefits environmentalism discriminatory taxation deter improper luxurious behavior125
similarly vivienne brown stated economic journal 20th century united states reaganomics supporters wall street journal similar sources spread among general public partial misleading vision smith portraying extreme dogmatic defender laissezfaire capitalism supplyside economics126 fact wealth nations includes following statement payment taxes

subjects every state ought contribute towards support government nearly possible proportion respective abilities proportion revenue respectively enjoy protection state127

commentators argued smiths works show support progressive flat income specifically named taxes thought required state among luxury goods taxes rent128 smith argued impossibility taxing people proportion economic revenue capitation wealth nations viik1 smith argued taxes principally toward protecting justice certain publick institutions necessary benefit society could provided private enterprise wealth nations ivix51
additionally smith outlined proper expenses government wealth nations book included requirements government enforce contracts provide justice system grant patents copy rights provide public goods infrastructure provide national defence regulate banking role government provide goods nature profit could never repay expense individual roads bridges canals harbours also encouraged invention ideas patent enforcement support infant industry monopolies supported partial public subsidies elementary education believed competition among religious institutions would provide general benefit society cases however smith argued local rather centralised control even publick works nature cannot afford revenue maintaining always better maintained local provincial revenue management local provincial administration general revenue state wealth nations vid18 finally outlined government support dignity monarch chief magistrate equal public fashion even states monarchs provided greater fashion magistrates republic naturally expect splendor court king mansionhouse doge129 addition allowed specific circumstances retaliatory tariffs beneficial

recovery great foreign market generally compensate transitory inconvenience paying dearer short time sorts goods130

however added general retaliatory tariff seems method compensating injury done certain classes people another injury classes almost classes wealth nations ivii39
economic historians jacob viner regard smith strong advocate free markets limited government smith called natural liberty dogmatic supporter laissezfaire131
economist daniel klein believes using term free market economics free market economist identify ideas smith general slightly misleading klein offers characteristics central identity smiths economic thought argues name needed give accurate depiction smithian identity132133 economist david ricardo straight misunderstandings smiths thoughts free market people still fall victim thinking smith free market economist without exception though ricardo pointed smith support helping infant industries smith believed government subsidise newly formed industry fear infant industry grew adulthood would unwilling surrender government help134 smith also supported tariffs imported goods counteract internal good smith also fell pressure supporting tariffs support national defence134
also claimed emma rothschild among smith would supported minimum wage135 although direct textual evidence supporting claim indeed smith wrote

price labour must observed cannot ascertained accurately anywhere different prices often paid place sort labour according different abilities workmen according easiness hardness masters wages regulated pretend determine usual experience seems show never regulate properly though often pretended wealth nations book chapter

however smith also noted contrary existence imbalanced inequality bargaining power136

landlord farmer master manufacturer merchant though employ single workman could generally live year upon stocks already acquired many workmen could subsist week could subsist month scarce year without employment long workman necessary master master necessity immediate

alsoedit

organizational capital
list abolitionist forerunners
list fellows royal society arts

notesedit


life adam smith writes fourth year visit grandfathers house strathendry banks leven smith stolen passing band gypsies time could found presently gentleman arrived gypsy woman miles road carrying child crying piteously scouts immediately dispatched direction indicated came upon woman leslie wood soon threw burden escaped child brought back mother smith would made fear poor gypsy8
editions theory moral sentiments published 1759 1761 1767 1774 1781 1790 respectively67


citationsedit


great thinkers scottish enlightenment
davis william figgins hedengren david klein daniel 2011 economics professors favorite economic thinkers journals blogs along party policy views econ journal watch
best scottish books adam smith retrieved january 2012
schmadel lutz 2003 dictionary minor planet names 12838 adamsmith springer berlin heidelberg isbn 9783540299257 retrieved january 2016
1895
bussingburks 2003 38–39
buchan 2006
1895
bussingburks 2003
buchan 2006
bussingburks 2003
1895
buchholz 1999
introductory economics publishers isbn 8122418309
1895
1895 24–25
bussingburks 2003
buchan 2006
scott never forgotten hutcheson excerpts scott econ journal watch 96–109 january 20111
1895
smith 1762 1985 lectures rhetoric belles lettres 1762 glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith indianapolis liberty fund 1984 retrieved february 2012
bussingburks 2003
winch donald september 2004 smith adam 1723 1790 dictionary national biography oxford university press
1895
buchholz 1999
buchan 2006
buchholz 1999
buchholz 1999
buchholz 1999 16–17
buchholz 1999
adam smith policonomicscom
buchan 2006
stewart 1799 essays philosophical subjects prefixed account life writings author dugald steward frse basil transactions royal society edinburgh read steward january march 1793 glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith 1982
reign louis population shrunk million agricultural productivity reduced onethird taxes increased cusminsky rosa cendrero 1967 fisiócratas buenos aires centro editor américa latina
1701–1714 spanish succession 1688–1697 grand alliance 1672–1678 francodutch 1667–1668 devolution 1618–1648 thirty years
smith 1976 wealth nations edited campbell skinner glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith
buchan 2006
james currie thomas creevey february 1793 lpool currie
buchan 2006
buchholz 1999
buchan 2006
buchan 2006
buchan 2006
buchan 2006
bussingburks 2003
buchan 2006
buchan 2006
bonar 1895 xx–xxiv
buchan 2006
buchan 2006
1895
skousen 2001
buchholz 1999
boswells life samuel johnson 1780
ross 2010
stewart dugald 1853 works adam smith account life writings london henry bohn lxix oclc 3226570
1895 376–77
bonar 1895
ross 1995
times obituary adam smith times httpenwikisourceorgwikithetimes1790obituaryadamsmith july 1790
coase 1976 529–46
coase 1976
hill 2001 hidden theology adam smith european journal history economic thought 1–29 doi101080713765225
hume religion stanford encyclopedia philosophy retrieved 2008
eric schliesser 2003 obituary vain philosopher adam smiths reflections humes life hume studies 327–62
andrew millar project university edinburgh millarprojectedacuk retrieved june 2016
adam smith glasgow edition works correspondence theory moral sentiments 1759
1895
falkner robert 1997 biography smith liberal democrat history group archived original june 2008 retrieved 2008
smith 2002
viner 1991
wight jonathan saving adam smith upper saddle river prentichall 2002
robbins lionel history economic thought princeton princeton university press 1998
brue stanley randy grant evolution economic thought mason thomson higher education 2007
otteson james 2002 adam smiths marketplace life cambridge cambridge university press 2002
ekelund hebert 2007 history economic theory method edition waveland press united states
smith 1976 wealth nations edited campbell skinner glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith
smith 1980 glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith edited wightman bryce oxford clarendon press
smith 1976 glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith 184–85 edited raphael macfie oxford clarendon press
smith 1976 glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith edited cambell skinner oxford clarendon press
smith 1976 glasgow edition 26–27
mandeville 1724 fable bees london tonson
smith 1976 glasgow edition
smith 1976 glasgow edition
gopnik adam market yorker october 2010 retrieved april 2011
samuelson anordhaus william 1989 economics 13th edition mcgrawhill
samuelson anordhaus william 1989 idem
smith 1976 idem
smith 1976 para
roaring nineties 2006
glasgow edition works correspondence adam smith 1982 volumes
adam smith jonathan swift university winchester archived original november 2009 retrieved february 2010
david smith 2010 free lunch easily digestible economics profile books 2010
lseabrooke 2006 global standards market civilization taylor francis 2006
stigler george 1976 successes failures professor smith journal political economy 1199–213 1202 also published selected papers pdfpermanent dead link graduate school business university chicago
samuelson paul 1977 modern theorists vindication adam smith american economic review reprinted wood adam smith critical assessments 498–509 preview
schumpeter history economic analysis york oxford university press
roemer 1987 marxian value analysis palgrave dictionary economics
mandel ernest 1987 marx karl heinrich palgrave dictionary economics
marshall alfred marshall mary paley 1879 economics industry
jevons stanley 1879 theory political economy
clark 1998 politicaleconomy comparative approach westport praeger
campos antonietta 1987 marginalist economics palgrave dictionary economics
smith 1977 §book chapter
vanity philosopher equality hierarchy postclassical economics
benians ‘adam smith’s project empire’ cambridge historical journal 1925 249–83
anthony howe free trade liberal england 1846–1946 oxford 1997
shield nicholson project empire critical study economics imperialism special reference ideas adam smith london 1909
marcwilliam palen “adam smith advocate empire 1870–1932” historical journal march 2014 179–98
clydesdale pounds 1981 wises banknoteworld archived original october 2008 retrieved october 2008
current banknotes clydesdale bank committee scottish clearing bankers archived original october 2008 retrieved october 2008
smith replaces elgar note october 2006 archived original march 2007 retrieved 2008
blackley michael september 2007 adam smith sculpture tower royal mile edinburgh evening news
fillo maryellen march 2001 ccsu welcomes block hartford courant
kelley 1997 piece uncc puzzle charlotte artist says charlotte observer
shaweagle joanna june 1997 artist sheds light sculpture washington times
adam smiths spinning ohio outdoor sculpture inventory archived original february 2005 retrieved 2008
restoration panmure house archived original january 2012
adam smiths home gets business school revival bloomberg
adam smith society adam smith society archived original july 2007 retrieved 2008
australian adam smith club adam smith club retrieved october 2008
levy david june 1992 interview milton friedman federal reserve bank minneapolis retrieved september 2008
speech greenspan adam smith february 2005 archived original 2008 retrieved 2008
adam smith junkie forbes july 2007 archived original 2008 retrieved june 2008
stein herbert april 1994 board contributors remembering adam smith wall street journal asia
brown vivienne pack spencer werhane patricia january 1993 untitled review capitalism moral system adam smiths critique free market economy adam smith legacy modern capitalism economic journal 230–32 doi1023072234351 jstor 2234351
smith 1977
market yorker october 2010
smith 1977
smith 1976 glasgow edition
viner jacob april 1927 adam smith laissezfaire journal political economy 198–232 doi101086253837 jstor 1823421
klein daniel 2008 toward public professional identity economics econ journal watch 358–72
klein daniel 2009 desperately seeking smithians responses questionnaire building identity econ journal watch 113–80
buchholz todd december 1990 38–39
martin christopher adam smith liberal economics reading minimum wage debate 1795–96 econ journal watch 110–25 2011
smith wealth nations 1776 book


referencesedit

robertlhelbroner essential adam smith isbn 0393955303
benians 1925 adam smith’s project empire cambridge historical journal 249–83
bonar james 1895 catalogue library adam smith london macmillan oclc 2320634
buchan james 2006 authentic adam smith life ideas norton company isbn 0393061213
buchholz todd 1999 ideas dead economists introduction modern economic thought penguin books isbn 0140283137
bussingburks marie 2003 influential economists minneapolis oliver press isbn 1881508722
campbell skinner andrew 1985 adam smith routledge isbn 0709934734
coase october 1976 adam smiths view journal economics 529–46 doi101086466886
nicholson joseph shield 1909 project empire critical study economics imperialism special reference ideas adam smith london
otteson james 2002 adam smiths marketplace life cambridge cambridge university press isbn 0521016568
palen marcwilliam march 2014 adam smith advocate empire 1870–1932 historical journal 179–98
john 1895 life adam smith london york macmillan isbn 0722226586
ross simpson 1995 life adam smith oxford university press isbn 0198288212
ross simpson 2010 life adam smith oxford university press
skousen mark 2001 making modern economics lives ideas great thinkers sharpe isbn 0765604809
smith adam 1977 1776 inquiry nature causes wealth nations university chicago press isbn 0226763749
smith adam 1982 1759 raphael macfie theory moral sentiments liberty fund isbn 0865970122
smith adam 2002 1759 knud haakonssen theory moral sentiments cambridge university press isbn 0521598478
smith vernon july 1998 faces adam smith southern economic journal 2–19 doi1023071061349 jstor 1061349
tribe keith mizuta hiroshi 2002 critical bibliography adam smith pickering chatto isbn 9781851967414
viner jacob 1991 douglas irwin essays intellectual history economics princeton jersey princeton university press isbn 0691042667

readingedit



wikisource text short biographical dictionary english literatures article smith adam



butler eamonn march 2007 adam smith primer institute economic affairs isbn 0255366086
culture political economy adam smith alfred marshall tabur 2012
copley stephen march 1995 adam smiths wealth nations interdisciplinary essays manchester university press isbn 0719039436
glahe june 1977 adam smith wealth nations 1776–1976 university press colorado isbn 0870810820
haakonssen knud march 2006 cambridge companion adam smith cambridge university press isbn 0521779243
hardwick marsh 2014 propriety prosperity studies philosophy adam smith palgrave macmillan
hamowy ronald 2008 smith adam 1732–1790 encyclopedia libertarianism thousand oaks sage cato institute 470–72 doi1041359781412965811n287 isbn 9781412965804 lccn 2008009151 oclc 750831024
hollander samuel june 1973 economics adam smith university toronto press isbn 0802063020
iain mclean 2006 adam smith radical egalitarian interpretation 21st century edinburgh university press isbn 0748623523
milgate murray stimson shannon august 2009 adam smith century transformation politics political economy princeton university press isbn 0691140375
muller jerry july 1995 adam smith time princeton university press isbn 0691001618
orourke december 2006 wealth nations groveatlantic isbn 0871139499
otteson james 2002 adam smiths marketplace life cambridge university press isbn 0521016568
otteson james 2013 adam smith bloomsbury isbn 9781441190130
phillipson nicholas adam smith enlightened life yale university press 2010 isbn 9780300169270 pages scholarly biography
iain mclean adam smith radical egalitarian interpretation 21st century edinburgh university press 2004
éric pichet 2004 adam smith connais french biography
vianello 1999 social accounting adam smith mongiovi petri value distribution capital essays honour pierangelo garegnani london routledge isbn 0415142776
winch donald 2007 2004 smith adam oxford dictionary national biography online oxford university press doi101093refodnb25767 subscription public library membership required
wolloch 2015 symposium jack russell weinsteins adam smiths pluralism rationality education moral sentiments cosmos taxis
adam smith empire talking empire podcast imperial global forum march 2014

external linksedit



wikisource original works written
adam smith





wikiquote quotations related adam smith





wikimedia commons media related adam smith



adam smith archived original 2009 retrieved 2009 adam smith institute
works adam smith open library
works adam smith project gutenberg
works adam smith internet archive
works adam smith librivox public domain audiobooks
references adam smith historic european newspapers



academic offices


preceded
robert cunninghame graham gartmore
rector university glasgow
1787–1789
succeeded
walter campbell shawfield













adam smith



books



essays philosophical subjects
lectures jurisprudence
theory moral sentiments
wealth nations





theories



classical economics
invisible hand










articles related adam smith
















economics






economic theory
econometrics
applied economics





macroeconomics



adaptive expectations
aggregate demand
balance payments
business cycle
capacity utilization
capital flight
central bank
consumer confidence
currency
demand shock
depression great depression
dsge
economic growth
economic indicator
economic rent
effective demand
general theory keynes
hyperinflation
inflation
interest
interest rate
investment
is–lm model
microfoundations
monetary policy
money
nairu
national accounts

rate profit
rational expectations
recession
saving
shrinkflation
stagflation
supply shock
unemployment
macroeconomics publications





microeconomics



aggregation problem
budget
consumer choice
convexity
cost–benefit analysis
deadweight loss
distribution
duopoly
economic equilibrium
economic shortage
economic surplus
economies scale
economies scope
elasticity
expected utility hypothesis
externality
general equilibrium theory
indifference curve
intertemporal choice
marginal cost
market failure
market structure
monopoly
monopsony
nonconvexity
oligopoly
opportunity cost
preference
production
profit
public good
returns scale
risk aversion
scarcity
social choice theory
sunk costs
supply demand
theory firm
trade
transaction cost
value
uncertainty
utility
microeconomics publications





applied fields



agricultural
business
demographic
development
economic history
education
engineering
environmental
financial
health
industrial organization
international
knowledge
labour
economics
monetary
natural resource
public
service
transportation
urban
welfare





methodology



behavioral economics
computational economics
econometrics
economic systems
experimental economics
mathematical economics
methodological publications





economic thought



ancient economic thought
austrian school economics
chicago school economics
classical economics
feminist economics
heterodox economics
institutional economics
keynesian economics
mainstream economics
marxian economics
neoclassical economics
postkeynesian economics
schools overview






notable economists
thinkers within economics




kenneth arrow
gary becker
francis ysidro edgeworth
milton friedman
ragnar frisch
friedrich hayek
harold hotelling
john maynard keynes
tjalling koopmans
paul krugman
robert lucas
jacob marschak
alfred marshall
karl marx
john neumann
vilfredo pareto
david ricardo
paul samuelson
joseph schumpeter
amartya
herbert simon
adam smith
robert solow
léon walras






international organizations



asiapacific economic cooperation
economic cooperation organization
european free trade association
international monetary fund
organisation economic cooperation development
world bank
world trade organization








category
index
lists
outline
publications
business economics portal

















classical economists






francis hutcheson
bernard mandeville
david hume
adam smith
jeanbaptiste
thomas malthus
james mill
francis place
david ricardo
henry thornton
john ramsay mcculloch
james maitland earl lauderdale
jeremy bentham
jean charles léonard sismondi
johann heinrich thünen
john stuart mill
henry charles carey
nassau william senior
edward gibbon wakefield
john
frédéric bastiat
thomas tooke
robert torrens

















enlightenment








topics










atheism
capitalism
civil liberties
counterenlightenment
critical thinking
deism
democracy
empiricism
encyclopédistes
enlightened absolutism
free markets
haskalah
humanism
human rights
liberalism
liberté égalité fraternité
methodological skepticism
nationalism
natural philosophy
objectivity
rationality
rationalism
reason
reductionism
sapere aude
science
scientific method
socialism
universality
weimar classicism
















thinkers







france



jean rond dalembert
étienne bonnot condillac
marquis condorcet
denis diderot
claude adrien helvétius
baron dholbach
georgeslouis leclerc
montesquieu
françois quesnay
jeanjacques rousseau
marquis sade
voltaire





germany



johann wolfgang goethe
johann georg hamann
johann gottfried herder
friedrich heinrich jacobi
immanuel kant
gotthold ephraim lessing
moses mendelssohn
friedrich schiller
thomas wizenmann





greece



neophytos doukas
theoklitos farmakidis
rigas feraios
theophilos kairis
adamantios korais





ireland



robert boyle
edmund burke





italy



cesare beccaria
gaetano filangieri
antonio genovesi
pietro verri





poland



tadeusz czacki
hugo kołłątaj
stanisław konarski
ignacy krasicki
julian ursyn niemcewicz
stanisław august poniatowski
jędrzej śniadecki
stanisław staszic
józef wybicki
andrzej stanisław załuski
józef andrzej załuski





portugal



sebastião josé carvalho melo





russia



catherine





spain



charles
benito jerónimo feijóo montenegro





united kingdom
scotland



francis bacon
jeremy bentham
joseph black
james boswell
adam ferguson
edward gibbon
robert hooke
david hume
francis hutcheson
samuel johnson
john locke
isaac newton
thomas reid
adam smith
mary wollstonecraft





united states



benjamin franklin
thomas jefferson
james madison
george mason
thomas paine























liberalism



development



contributions liberal theory
history liberalism





ideas



civil political rights
cultural liberalism
democracy

liberal democracy


economic liberalism
egalitarianism
free market
free trade
freedom press
freedom religion
freedom speech
gender equality
harm principle
internationalism
laissezfaire
liberal neutrality
liberty
market economy
natural legal rights
negativepositive liberty
open society
permissive society
private property
rule
secularism
separation church state
social contract
welfare state





schools



anarchocapitalism
civic nationalism
classical liberalism
conservative liberalism
democratic liberalism
geolibertarianism
green liberalism
liberal feminism

equity feminism


liberal internationalism
liberal socialism
muscular liberalism
neoliberalism
ordoliberalism
rightlibertarianism
radical centrism
radicalism
religious liberalism
christian
islamic
secular liberalism
social liberalism
technoliberalism





figures



juan bautista alberdi
jean rond dalembert
rifaa altahtawi
anping
matthew arnold
raymond aron
frédéric bastiat
simone beauvoir
jeremy bentham
isaiah berlin
eduard bernstein
william beveridge
norberto bobbio
ludwig joseph brentano
john bright
edmund burke
thomas carlyle
anders chydenius
richard cobden
marquis condorcet
benjamin constant
benedetto croce
ralf dahrendorf
john dewey
charles dickens
denis diderot
zhang dongsun
ronald dworkin
ralph waldo emerson
karlhermann flach
milton friedman
john kenneth galbraith
william lloyd garrison
josé ortega gasset
david lloyd george
william gladstone
piero gobetti
francisco luís gomes
john gray
thomas hill green
friedrich hayek
auberon herbert
thomas hobbes
leonard hobhouse
john hobson

wilhelm humboldt
thomas jefferson
immanuel kant
namık kemal
john maynard keynes
kymlicka
john locke
salvador madariaga
james madison
harriet martineau
minoo masani
james mill
john stuart mill
john milton
ludwig mises
donald barkly molteno
chiozza money
charles montesquieu
josé maría luis mora
chantal mouffe
dadabhai naoroji
friedrich naumann
robert nozick
bertil ohlin
thomas paine
alan paton
karl popper
richard price
joseph priestley
guillermo prieto
françois quesnay
ignacio ramírez
rand
walther rathenau
john rawls
joseph
david ricardo
wilhelm röpke
richard rorty
carlo rosselli
murray rothbard
jeanjacques rousseau
jeanbaptiste
ahmed lutfi elsayed
amartya
shenzhi
shih
algernon sidney
emmanuel sieyès
i̇brahim şinasi
adam smith
hernando soto
herbert spencer
baruch spinoza
anne louise germaine staël
william graham sumner
tawney
johan rudolph thorbecke
henry david thoreau
alexis tocqueville
antoine destutt tracy
anne robert jacques turgot
voltaire
lester frank ward
weber
mary wollstonecraft
xingzhi
zhun





regional variants



africa

egypt
nigeria
senegal
south africa
tunisia
zimbabwe




asia

china
hong kong
india
iran
israel
japan
south korea
philippines
taiwan
thailand
turkey




europe

albania
armenia
austria
belgium
bulgaria
croatia
cyprus
czech lands
denmark
estonia
finland
france
germany
greece
hungary
iceland
italy
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
macedonia
moldova
montenegro
netherlands
norway
poland
portugal
romania
russia
serbia
slovakia
slovenia
spain
sweden
switzerland
ukraine
united kingdom




latin america caribbean

bolivia
brazil
chile
colombia
cuba
ecuador
honduras
mexico
nicaragua
panama
paraguay
peru
uruguay
venezuela




north america

canada
united states

modern liberalism






oceania

australia
zealand







organisations



liberal parties
africa liberal network
alliance liberals democrats europe alde
alliance liberals democrats europe party aldep
arab liberal federation
council asian liberals democrats cald
european democratic party
european liberal youth lymec
international federation liberal youth iflry
liberal international
liberal network latin america relial
liberal south east european network libseen





related topics



liberal bias academia
liberal conservatism
liberal socialism
national liberalism
regressive left








liberalism portal
politics portal

















social political philosophy



philosophers



ambedkar
arendt
aristotle
augustine
aurobindo
aquinas
aron
averroes
azurmendi
badiou
bakunin
baudrillard
bauman
benoist
bentham
berlin
bonald
bosanquet
burke
judith butler
camus
chanakya
chomsky
cicero
comte
confucius
beauvoir
debord
bois
durkheim
emerson
engels
foucault
fourier
franklin
gandhi
gehlen
gentile
alghazali
gramsci
grotius
habermas

hayek
hegel
heidegger
hobbes
hume
irigaray
jefferson
kant
kierkegaard
kirk
kropotkin
laozi

play
leibniz
lenin
locke
luxemburg
machiavelli
maistre
malebranche

marcuse
maritain
marsilius
marx
mencius
michels
mill
mises
montesquieu
möser
mozi
muhammad
negri
niebuhr
nietzsche
nozick
oakeshott
ortega
paine
pareto
pettit
plamenatz
plato
polanyi
popper
radhakrishnan
rand
rawls
renan
rothbard
rousseau
royce
russell
sade
santayana
sarkar
sartre
schmitt
searle
shang
simonović
skinner
smith
socrates
sombart
spann
spencer
spinoza
spirito
stirner
strauss


taine
taylor
thucydides
thoreau
tocqueville
vivekananda
voltaire
walzer
weber
žižek





social theories



ambedkarism
anarchism
authoritarianism
collectivism
communism
communitarianism
conflict theories
confucianism
consensus theory
conservatism
contractualism
cosmopolitanism
culturalism
fascism
feminist political theory
gandhism
individualism
legalism
liberalism
libertarianism
mohism
national liberalism
republicanism
social constructionism
social constructivism
social darwinism
social determinism
socialism
utilitarianism
vaisheshika





social concepts



civil disobedience
democracy
four occupations
justice

mandate heaven
peace
property
revolution
rights
social contract
society







related articles



jurisprudence
philosophy economics
philosophy education
philosophy history
philosophy love
philosophy
philosophy social science
political ethics
social epistemology








category
portal
task force

















property



owner



common

common land
communal land
community


cooperative
private
public
state

crown property
crown land







nature



croft
intangible
intellectual

indigenous


personal
tangible

immovable
real







common resources



commonpool resource
digital
global
information
knowledge






theory



bundle rights
commodity

fictitious commodities


common good economics
excludability
first possession

appropriation
homestead principle


free rider problem
game theory
georgism
gift economy
labor theory property
rent

rentseeking


legal plunder
natural rights
ownership

common
customary
self
state


property rights

primogeniture
usufruct
womens


right property
rivalry
tragedy commons

anticommons







applications







acequia watercourse
ejido agrarian land
forest types
inheritance
land tenure
property

alienation
easement
restraint alienation
real estate
title







rights




fishing
forestdwelling india
freedom roam
grazing

pannage


hunting
land

aboriginal
indigenous
squatting


littoral
mineral

bergregal


right
water

priorappropriation
riparian










disposession
redistribution



bioprospecting
collectivization
eminent domain
enclosure
eviction
expropriation
farhud
forced migration

population transfer


illegal fishing
illegal logging
land reform
legal plunder
piracy
poaching
primitive accumulation
privatization
regulatory taking
slavery

bridebuying
human trafficking
wage
wife selling




inheritance
poll
progressive
property


theft





scholars
work



frédéric bastiat
ronald coase
henry george
garrett hardin
david harvey
john locke

treatises government


karl marx
marcel mauss

gift


john stuart mill
elinor ostrom
karl polanyi

great transformation


pierrejoseph proudhon

property


david ricardo
murray rothbard

ethics liberty


jeanjacques rousseau

social contract


adam smith

wealth nations










categories property
property

country
















authority control



worldcat identities
viaf 49231791
lccn n80032761
isni 0000 0001 2279 6642
118615033
selibr 284982
sudoc 027141578
cb119250114 data
bibsys 90062193
musicbrainz a1bf4cd4fe534fb992cdfb3c321a2bf1
35505131
00456871
jn19990008033
xx1011829
iath w6z60tcf











retrieved httpsenwikipediaorgwindexphptitleadamsmitholdid816435981 categories adam smith1723 births1790 deathsacademics university glasgowalumni balliol college oxfordalumni university glasgowbritish classical liberalsburials kirk canongatecapitalismclassical economistsenlightenment philosophersfellows royal societyfellows royal society artsfounder fellows royal society edinburghmembers clubmembers philosophical society edinburghmoral philosopherspeople kirkcaldyrectors university glasgowscottish business theoristsscottish economics writersscottish economistsscottish logiciansscottish philosophersscottish scholars academicshidden categories articles dead external linksarticles dead external links june 2017articles permanently dead external linkswikipedia pending changes protected pages level 1use dates october 2017engvarb october 2017biography signaturearticles hcardsall articles unsourced statementsarticles unsourced statements february 2013wikipedia articles incorporating citation odnbarticles open library linksarticles project gutenberg linksarticles internet archive linksarticles librivox linksarticles containing frenchlanguage textarticles containing hebrewlanguage textarticles containing latinlanguage textac elementswikipedia articles viaf identifierswikipedia articles lccn identifierswikipedia articles isni identifierswikipedia articles identifierswikipedia articles selibr identifierswikipedia articles identifierswikipedia articles bibsys identifierswikipedia articles musicbrainz identifierswikipedia articles identifierswikipedia articles snacid identifiers
