gazetteer place names united kingdom showing places county unitary authority council area geographical coordinates




























also
external links







united kingdom



location names beginning


location names beginning aa–ak
location names beginning
location names beginning am–ar
location names beginning as–az


location names beginning


location names beginning bab–bal
location names beginning bam–bap
location names beginning
location names beginning bas–baz
location names beginning bea–bem
location names beginning ben–bez
location names beginning
location names beginning bla–blac
location names beginning blad–bly
location names beginning boa–bot
location names beginning bou–boz
location names beginning
location names beginning bre–bri
location names beginning bro–bron
location names beginning broo–brt
location names beginning bru–bun
location names beginning bur–bz


location names beginning


location names beginning ca–cap
location names beginning car–cd
location names beginning ce–chap
location names beginning char–che
location names beginning chi–ck
location names beginning cl–cn
location names beginning co–col
location names beginning com–cor
location names beginning cos–cou
location names beginning cov–coy
location names beginning
location names beginning cre–croc
location names beginning croe–cros
location names beginning crot–croz
location names beginning cru–cu
location names beginning cw–cz


location names beginning


location names beginning da–dam
location names beginning dan–ddu
location names beginning de–dee
location names beginning deo–dn
location names beginning do–dor
location names beginning dos–doz
location names beginning
location names beginning ds–dz


location names beginning


location names beginning ea–eass
location names beginning east a–east
location names beginning east e–east
location names beginning east m–east
location names beginning eat–ee
location names beginning ef–el
location names beginning em–ez


location names beginning


location names beginning fa–fe
location names beginning ff–fn
location names beginning fo–foz
location names beginning fr–fz


location names beginning


location names beginning gab–gan
location names beginning gao–gar
location names beginning gas–gaz
location names beginning ge–gl
location names beginning gm–gq
location names beginning gr–gred
location names beginning gree–gz


location names beginning


location names beginning ha–ham
location names beginning han–har
location names beginning has–hd
location names beginning he–hem
location names beginning hen–hh
location names beginning hi–highr
location names beginning highs–hn
location names beginning ho–hoo
location names beginning hop–ht
location names beginning hu–hz


location names beginning


location names beginning ia–im
location names beginning in–ir
location names beginning is–ix
location names beginning


location names beginning


location names beginning ka–key
location names beginning kib–kin
location names beginning kip–kz


location names beginning


location names beginning la–laz
location names beginning lea–lei
location names beginning lel–lez
location names beginning lf–litm
location names beginning litn–liz
location names beginning llae–llane
location names beginning llanf–llann
location names beginning llano–lly
location names beginning lm–loi
location names beginning lol–lov
location names beginning low–loz
location names beginning lu–ly


location names beginning


location names beginning ma–maq
location names beginning mar–md
location names beginning me–mic
location names beginning mid–mig
location names beginning milb–milk
location names beginning mill
location names beginning miln–mix
location names beginning mo–mor
location names beginning mos–mz


location names beginning


location names beginning na–nev
location names beginning new–newl
location names beginning newm–newto
location names beginning newton
location names beginning t–ney
location names beginning ni–north
location names beginning north h–nz


location names beginning


location names beginning oa–od
location names beginning of–old
location names beginning h–om
location names beginning on–oz


location names beginning


location names beginning pab–pap
location names beginning par–pay
location names beginning pe–pen
location names beginning peo–pn
location names beginning po–poz
location names beginning pr–pz


location names beginning


location names beginning


location names beginning


location names beginning ra–ray
location names beginning re–rh
location names beginning ri–ror
location names beginning ros–rz


location names beginning


location names beginning saa–sanc
location names beginning sand–say
location names beginning sb–sf
location names beginning sg–sh
location names beginning si–sm
location names beginning sn–souts
location names beginning south
location names beginning sow–stao
location names beginning stap–st
location names beginning sto–st
location names beginning str–stt
location names beginning stu–sz


location names beginning


location names beginning ta–tha
location names beginning the–thh
location names beginning thi–thw
location names beginning
location names beginning to–tq
location names beginning tr–tre
location names beginning tri–tz


location names beginning


location names beginning u–uppen
location names beginning upper a–upper
location names beginning upper i–upper
location names beginning uppi–uz


location names beginning


location names beginning


location names beginning


location names beginning wa–wal
location names beginning wam–way
location names beginning wd–west
location names beginning weste–west
location names beginning west m–wey
location names beginning wha–whitc
location names beginning white
location names beginning whitf–why
location names beginning wi–win
location names beginning wir–wood
location names beginning woof–wy


location names beginning


location names beginning

alsoedit

toponymy great britain study place names
list generic forms british place names
united nations group experts geographical names












list places europe



sovereign states



albania
andorra
armenia
austria
azerbaijan
belarus
belgium
bosnia herzegovina
bulgaria
croatia
cyprus
czech republic
denmark
estonia
finland
france
georgia
germany
greece
hungary
iceland
ireland

italy
kazakhstan
latvia
liechtenstein
lithuania
luxembourg
macedonia
malta
moldova
monaco
montenegro
netherlands
norway
poland
portugal
romania
russia
marino
serbia
slovakia
slovenia
spain
sweden
switzerland
turkey
ukraine
united kingdom





states limited
recognition



abkhazia
artsakh
kosovo
northern cyprus
south ossetia
transnistria





dependencies
entities



åland
faroe islands
gibraltar
guernsey
isle
jersey
svalbard

















lists populated places country




dependent territories partly recognized states shown italics



africa



algeria
angola
ascension island helena tristan cunha
benin
botswana
burkina faso
burundi
cameroon
cape verde
central african republic
chad
comoros
democratic republic congo
republic congo
côte divoire
djibouti
egypt
equatorial guinea
eritrea
ethiopia
gabon
gambia
ghana
guinea
guineabissau
kenya
lesotho
liberia
libya
madagascar
malawi
mali
mauritania
mauritius
morocco
mozambique
namibia
niger
nigeria
rwanda
tomé príncipe
senegal
seychelles
sierra leone
somalia
south africa
south sudan
sudan
swaziland
tanzania
togo
tunisia
uganda
zambia
zimbabwe





americas caribbean



argentina
bolivia
brazil
canada
chile
colombia
costa rica
cuba
greenland
guyana
haiti
honduras
mexico
nicaragua
panama
paraguay
peru
suriname
united states
uruguay
venezuela




caribbean



anguilla
antigua barbuda
aruba
bahamas
barbados
bonaire
british virgin islands
cayman islands
cuba
curacao
dominica
dominican republic
grenada
guadeloupe
haiti
jamaica
martinique
montserrat
puerto rico
saba
saint barthélemy
saint kitts nevis
saint lucia
saint martin
saint vincent grenadines
sint eustatius
sint maarten
trinidad tobago
turks caicos islands
virgin islands








asia



afghanistan
armenia
azerbaijan
bahrain
bangladesh
bhutan
burma
cambodia
china
cyprus
east timor
georgia
hong kong
india
indonesia
iran
iraq
israel
japan
jordan
north korea
south korea
kuwait
laos
lebanon
malaysia
mongolia
nepal
pakistan
palestine
papua guinea
philippines
saudi arabia
singapore
lanka
syria
taiwan
tajikistan
thailand

vietnam
yemen





europe



albania
andorra
austria
belarus
belgium
bosnia herzegovina
bulgaria
croatia
czech republic
denmark
estonia
faroe islands
finland
france
germany
greece
hungary
iceland
ireland
isle
italy
kosovo
latvia
liechtenstein
lithuania
luxembourg
macedonia
malta
moldova
monaco
montenegro
netherlands
norway
poland
portugal
romania
russia
marino
serbia
slovakia
slovenia
spain
sweden
switzerland
turkey
ukraine
united kingdom





oceania



australia
american samoa
fiji
french polynesia
guam
kiribati
marshall islands
nauru
caledonia
zealand
niue
northern mariana islands
palau
pitcairn islands
samoa
solomon islands
tokelau
tonga
tuvalu
vanuatu
wallis futuna






external linksedit

gazetteer british place names






retrieved httpsenwikipediaorgwindexphptitlelistofunitedkingdomlocationsoldid804384962 categories lists united kingdom locations name
